In this section we will learn about the concept of the cash so will learn what caching is how it works
in LA AVO and what good it can do for us and also what are the potential problems.
So let's take a look at our blog posts page.
You can see that we display a list of blog posts with the count of comments that they have.
And also on the right side of this page you can see that we display most commented blog posts and also
we display the users that were most active and most active in the last month.
So if you will take a look at the post controller you can see that we are executing separate queries
for all of this data and important thing to know is that this happens every time we visit this particular
page.
So it might not be a problem when you are developing on your local environment and only you are visiting
this page but this might be a problem when your application is life and there are plenty of users visiting
your pages and then they visit this blog post page and you execute a lot of queries from your database.
So this might just slow down your application.
So usually fetching the data from the database is the pain point inside the application.
So you would always wants to make as little queries to the database as possible and sometimes it's much
it's not the best idea to actually query the database especially if the data does not change.
So let's see if anything actually happens when we refresh this page.
Well we know that nothing has happened because we haven't added on your blog post and we haven't added
any comments so nothing actually has changed the most commented blog posts are still the same.
The most active users are also the same.
And anyway they're actually fetched from the database each single time you refresh the page and maybe
they shouldn't be.
Now let's see what cash actually is how it works and what it can do for us.
So we are starting here.
For example we are inside our control controller doesn't have to be a controller.
You can fetch data from different places but let's assume we are inside a controller.
So we are here we want some data we want blog posts we have comments we want to fetch the most comment
and blog posts.
Now normally you will just ask for this data through your database you will use eloquent model which
would execute a query and return that fresh data each time you ask for it.
So let's think of it as a layer.
Normally you just have those two layers you have your controller and your storage so cache will be a
layer that you will put in between your actual storage so where the real data is being stored which
would be my sequel database.
In our case and the controller or the other place from which you fetch the data now what cache actually
is is it's an abstract concept for actually storing the data that you would like to fetch from a different
kind of storage from which it can be accessed faster than from a database.
So for example you can store the cache inside playing files.
This only works for simple applications so this is the default option by the way and we'll use it by
default.
But there are also better options so you can also store it inside my sequel database which doesn't really
make much sense because you will either have to have two databases or just use the same database.
That all depends of how your queries are complicated but anyway the most most the most interesting options
are using either the main cached or Redis.
So basically mem cached and are other databases in their own right but how they work is they actually
instead of storing full tables with a structure.
They are simple key value store.
So you have a database which basically has a key which might be a string or a number or whatever and
it just returning data for that particular key.
And this makes them very fast.
Additional think you should know is that they can work inside the memory.
So usually my sequel will store the data on a disk and it it will read the data from the disk.
So if you have an SSD drive on your server it might be faster.
But anyway it's always slower to read from the disk then to read from the memory.
That's why using mem cached or Redis might make querying for the data much much faster.
OK so we talked about those layers and that cache will seat between our place where we fetch the data
for example on controller and the actual storage.
Now let's see what the simple diagram of how this will work looks like.
So first you want to fetch the data.
So we ask your cache whether it already has the data for whatever you want.
If it does it is simply returned from the cache.
So let's imagine we have that in Redis or a man cache servers.
It is being usually immediately returned from the memory.
So this is very fast.
Now if it's not found in cache then we have to actually fetch it from the database but then we can store
it inside the cache.
So many cache Redis and then return it back.
So after this first cycle if this wasn't found in cash it is actually fetched.
So we actually execute this queries but then we store it inside the cache.
So when another user is doing the same thing as you did.
So he is fetching the data this time it is found in cache because it was already cached by the previous
request.
So it is immediately returned now before you actually optimize any part of your application it's important
to know what is the slowest part of your application.
What can potentially cause problems.
So this section is not really about that we need some performance optimizations right now but we will
just generally learn on how to use cash and how it works.
But before you actually optimize anything remember that you have have to profile it first and profiling
means actually finding what has to be optimized.
So you shouldn't be optimizing when you don't know what is the slowest part of your application.
Now in the next lecture to actually find out what queries are being executed will install a great package
called larval debug debug bar when we'll be able to see here on our page what queries were executed.
Obviously this is optional you don't really have to install it but this will give us much more insight
on what happens in our application and what we can or should optimize.